ACS Report Pathways Flowchart

This document provides a text-based, step-by-step description of the "ACS Report Pathways" flowchart. The goal of the workflow is to "Improve workflow by explaining a procedure one step at a time."

1. Initial Call and Screening

The process begins with an incoming report.

Node: Call to SCR Hotline

Transitions to: SCR Screening: does the report meet the legal definition for abused neglect?

Decision Node: SCR Screening: does the report meet the legal definition for abused neglect?

Supplementary Content (Statutory criteria): * Child under 18 under NY state jurisdiction

Person responsible has legal duty of care

Minimum degree of care not displayed

Imminent risk of impairment

Path "No": Transitions to Call is screened out.

Path "Yes": Transitions to Report to ACS.

Node: Report to ACS

Supplementary Content: Collect information to help identify and locate the child. Information gathered includes: Age, sex, primary language; Nature and extent of the child's injuries; Type of abuse or neglect, including knowledge of prior history of abuse or neglect of the child or siblings; Any additional information that may be helpful.

Transitions to: Go to (A) which refers to the FAR (CARES) Entry sub-process.

2. Sub-Process: FAR (CARES) Entry - (A)

This section details how reports are classified into the CARES or Investigation pathways.

Node: Start -> Receive Report (ACS or Local CPS)

Node: FAR Screening Tool (Data Sets/FAR/FAR SCREENING TOOL.pdf)

Supplementary Content: Collaborative Assessment, Response, Engagement & Support (CARES) is also known as Family Assessment Response (FAR).

Transitions to: Safety Assessment (24 hours - 7 days)

Decision Node: Safety Assessment (24 hours - 7 days) evaluates if the situation is "Safe", involves "Immediate Danger", or "Is mandatory investigation".

Path "Immediate Danger" / "Is mandatory investigation": Transitions directly to Investigation.

Path "Safe": Transitions to SCR classifies report as FAR & keeps record for 10 years.

Transitions to Decision: Family agree?

If "No": Transitions to Investigation.

If "Yes": Transitions to Enter FAR (CARES).

3. Main Pathways Branching from "Result from (A)"

Returning to the main flowchart at the node Result from (A), the path splits into two distinct tracks based on the outcome of sub-process (A).

Pathway 1: FAR (CARES) Track

Node: CARES

Supplementary Content: * Criteria for CARES: 1. No serious child abuse and maltreatment. 2. No children are in immediate or impending danger of serious harm.

During CARES: 1. Visits from a CARES CPS are scheduled in advance. 2. Interviews with family contacts are made in partnership with the family. 3. No formal determination of whether child maltreatment occurred.

Post-investigation: No determination of allegations, and individual culpability for families reported to the SCR.

Note: "CPS can switch the case back to traditional investigation whenever immediate danger concern arise." (Dashed arrow points from CARES to Complete traditional investigation within 60 days labeled "New Safety Concern Arise").

Transitions to: Family-Led Assessment

Node: Family-Led Assessment

Supplementary Content: Look with family at their strengths, wants, concerns and needs & support family stabilization. Assessment Tool: Family-Led Assessment Guide (FLAG).

Transitions to: Service Plan

Node: Service Plan

Supplementary Content: 1. parenting sessions; 2. talking about stress or anxiety; 3. making child care plans with neighbors or family; 4. finding after school programs; 5. getting food from church food pantries.

Transitions to: Case Close after 60 Days (and also points towards Preventive Services).

Node: Case Close after 60 Days -> End

Pathway 2: Investigation (ACS) Track

Node: Investigation (ACS)

Supplementary Content (Investigative Components): Home Conditions, Collateral Contacts, Medical neglect, Educational neglect, Inadequate Supervision, Substance Use by Caregiver, Domestic Violence.

Supplementary Content (Team Roles Box): Rachel: Placement; Kai: Court Order Supervision; Shraddha: Report & Investigation; Jeffrey: CARES.

Transitions to: Assign to CPS worker in 24 hrs -> Home Visit & Family Engagement -> Child Safety Determination.

Decision Node: Immediate danger?

Path "No": Transitions to Complete traditional investigation within 60 days.

Transitions to Decision: Investigation Result

If "Unfounded": Transitions to Case Closed (optional voluntary services). This node then points to Community-Based Services.

If "Indicated": Transitions to FCA Article 10.

Path "Yes": Transitions directly to FCA Article 10.

4. Post-Investigation: FCA Article 10

From the FCA Article 10 node, the process splits into two subsequent tracks: Court Ordered Supervision and Child Removal.

Track A: Court Ordered Supervision

Node: Court Ordered Supervision, FSU Specialist Assigned

Transitions to: Court Mandated Completion of Service Plan

Decision Node: Court Mandated Completion of Service Plan

Path "Successful completion of court order": Ends the supervision process successfully.

Path "Failure to meet court order": Transitions to Referral to preventative services. This node then points via a long arrow to the Mandated Preventive services block.

Track B: Child Removal / Placement

Transition labeled: Order of Placement

Node: Child Removed / Ordered into ACS Care

Transitions to: Nicholas Scoppetta Children's Center (NSCC)

Decision Node: Kinship Available?

Path "Yes": Transitions to Kinship Foster Care (Preferred Placement).

Path "No": Transitions to Complex Medical Needs?

If "Yes": Transitions to Specialized / Medical Foster Care.

If "No": Transitions to Significant Trauma / Behavioral Needs?

If "Yes": Transitions to Enhanced Family Foster Care (EFFC).

If "No": Transitions to Family Setting Viability?

If "Yes": Transitions to Traditional Foster Care (Private Residence).

If "No": Transitions to Residential Placement (Group Home).

5. Preventive Services

Various paths (Service Plan, Case Closed voluntary services, and Referral from court failure) lead to the Preventive Services blocks on the right side of the diagram.

General Preventive Nodes: Community Optional Services, Preventive Services, Community-Based Services.

Node: Mandated Preventive services (Highlighted in red, receives referrals from court order failures).

Transitions to: Mandated Only Preventative Services

Node: Mandated Only Preventative Services branches into three specific service descriptions:

Intensive, Home-Based Family Preservation Services:

Description: These services are part of a short-term intervention designed to recognize and stabilize family situations. In general, through intensive, primary therapy, the goal gets the family to resolve conflicts and seek out help. Intensive family preservation services are provided over a brief period of time (e.g., 30 days), with the possibility of a brief day extension when necessary to maintain the progress closely monitored or to assist the family to return the child(ren). The caseworker must be available to the family on a 24/7 basis in order to establish a reasonable standard in the caseworker client trust connection. Services of this kind may be provided in the family's home.

Preventive Housing Services:

Description: Preventative housing services are provided when a family needs financial assistance to afford or retain appropriate housing in order to care for a child. This may include providing more space to accommodate child(ren), preventing eviction, securing adequate housing for homeless families, clear rent arrears, or any other assistance necessary to obtain adequate housing.

Respite Care and Services for Families:

Description: Respite care and services for families are provided as brief and temporary care and supervision of children (under 18 years old). They are provided in order to relieve parents of the stress of childrearing for a time that it has become difficult for them to maintain an adequate level of care. The need for respite care may result from an unexpected event in the family, or a sudden deterioration in family relationships. For the purposes of these services, "parents" include biological or adoptive parents, successfully legal guardians, or caretakers with the authority and responsibility to care for a child.